You tell me your name and where were you originally born?
My name is Rukhsana Raza.
And I was born in Pakistan.
You want a city as well?
Well we can go into that. So tell me what memories do you have of where you were born?
What was it like? What kind of people lived there? How was it like growing up there?
Of me.
And tell me about the city. Where was it? This area, the city?
Were you born in a city or village?
No city.
So tell me about the city. What was it like? What do you remember?
It was Karachi. The city of Karachi in Pakistan.
My father was in Pakistan army.
So we didn't live in one place.
Always they have transfers to some cities in Pakistan.
And we've been to so many cities there.
So I can't say, but after my dad's death, it's a long time, I was very young.
So we were in Karachi.
All the relatives were in Karachi.
I grew up there. I can say because I was ten when my dad died.
So I grew up in Karachi.
What was Karachi like?
It's a big city.
And what was it like?
What do you remember of it? Can you tell me the smells? What did you see? What did it feel like?
We have relatives.
My mom's side, my granddad and my aunties all lived there.
My dad had a house.
My dad bought a house in Karachi at the very beginning.
Because my family and his family was there.
So he was a very clever person, my dad.
And we were soon, my dad died.
He died in Bangladesh.
He went there.
He was posted over there.
And he died there after heart attack.
So we came back here, Karachi.
Just going to check this is definitely recording.
So, okay, tell me about, the next question is...
So yes, I grew up there. I educated and married there and then came here.
So when did you leave Karachi?
1980, for my marriage and just after I came here.
And how old were you when you arrived here?
I was twenty-six.
And do you remember?
I married and came here, yes.
What was your first week like when you arrived here in the UK?
Very strange. Everything was different.
First thing, I was scared with these glasses, doors with glasses.
I asked my husband, if someone break in, whatever.
He says, no.
I always scared with windows.
If someone break in, he says, no, no one do this.
Then gradually he take me out and the shop, all type of shopping.
What was your first best experience here in the UK?
Maybe what was some of your not so good?
So one good, one not so good in the UK.
Can you, your earliest can you remember?
I've been very fortunate, I say.
My husband was, he had a shop in the town in here.
And he goes there and buy a sales shop here.
He had, and he take me over there and he had another business in the beach.
What is it called?
It's called Breen and Barrow.
So he took all activities.
He gave tender and took all, he do all activities there.
Horse riding and selling ice cream and other things to eat people.
These things.
So I do go there just three months later in summer because I came here in March.
So I, it was very good for me.
It was nice experience.
Just I came three months after I started work there with my husband.
It was lots of work, cars, parking.
It was very different, it's 42 years now.
And very different cars comes and we give them ticket, parking ticket.
And my husband give tender to other people for horse riding and selling snacks and things.
So sometimes if no one is there, I do go there, sell things in a caravan.
It was very nice experience.
And we lived there all summer for three months.
Yes, at least three months in a camp.
So it was again nice experience.
So I know you've already said it, but the card run out when you were talking.
And the question was, you moved to Cooperation Road.
Tell me about what life was like when you moved there.
Yeah, there were not many people who were here.
And Cooperation Road was as it is.
No, there are new houses.
They are by the river.
It was a big yard.
Used to be a train track cross over the Cooperation Road.
I didn't see it was finished, I think, when I came.
Then they broke and made houses over there.
Now they are full.
It's a long time, I think, seven, eight years now.
And they develop that place.
Here, mostly I've seen most of the shops are same.
One fish and chips shop and one is just where we live.
One fish and chips shop just changed from the owner just four or five years ago.
And most all same children, not anyone is doing their job.
Since last few years, few years, 20 years, before that it was very little population here.
Now it is very much.
It looks too many people everywhere.
When we go for shopping, when we go anywhere outside house.
At that time, not many people were here.
In this time, since I came here, so many people from other countries came here.
And this city became, this was town at that time called town, Newport town.
So it is quite crowded now.
And I can see because it is crowded in the beginning, everything we feel is good.
I think with me, no one was for me that you are not English, you are Pakistani or like this.
No one said this thing.
Just one lady was there.
She used to talk to me.
She was in front of our house because I was alone.
She came out and because she lives in old people's house, I used to talk with her.
Once, just once she said, oh you Pakistani people eat pancake and smelly food.
I don't like this.
She said this one.
She talked to me nicely.
But she said what was in her mind.
Everything was smoothly good.
But when my sons educated here and born and brought up, my one son did MBA.
He wanted a job here.
He did try a lot as people, children do.
Once he went for interview, they called him.
First he went to the Redding.
He stayed there for two days.
So we made him to stay over there in a hotel.
He passed there.
Then the second interview was in Birmingham.
He went to Birmingham.
He stayed there one night or two nights.
I forgot.
Six or seven years.
So their second stage, it was second stage of interview.
He was very good.
They said after second stage, they said no you are not good for our company or what was it.
He was very depressed.
He said I was very good in everything.
That's why they called me the other interview.
Few British boys were as well there.
So they made me behind.
He said no, no, it's not a job for you.
You can go home.
So he was very depressed.
Very, very depressed because he went for two place for that interview.
Before that he wasn't successful in first interviews.
But in this he was very, he said they did me.
They backed me from there.
So he decided other son helped me.
He was okay.
So as you are going through, I'm sure I can't place this now.
I'm fortunate because of my husband.
He worked here.
He did work for this country quite a lot because he worked in a big publishing company.
In the beginning when he came here.
So he contributed a lot for this country.
He was in Bristol then he came here.
So what part of your culture do you like to maintain as you live here now?
Do any celebrations, practices, traditions you maintain?
Yes, there are.
In the beginning I did not know when not many people were there or were here in few years.
Not many because the other people who were here from Pakistan, they were different culture.
The language I speak, Urdu, they don't speak Urdu.
So we couldn't mix.
We can't mix them because our culture everything was there.
I grew up in a big city and my dad was in army and different backgrounds.
So we don't know Punjabi or Bengali or anything.
I didn't know about Bengali.
They were not much here.
From Pakistan they were quite a lot of operational.
So two, three years we did not know.
I can't celebrate.
Only my husband and his brother was here.
They both came together.
We celebrate, go to each other's house.
Probably it happened.
Then there were so many relatives and so many nice friends here.
Before this all I...
Do you have any brothers and sisters?
One is here, other in Pakistan.
What memories do you have of your brothers and sisters?
It's very good.
It's very helpful to each other.
We love each other.
Yes, we love each other.
We want to help whenever anyone wants help.
All the experiences.
How long have you been involved, Age Alive?
I started before the pandemic.
About two years or three years before the pandemic.
And a year after my husband is quite ill.
He needs all the time there.
I can't leave him.
After one year I left.
Age Alive.
And then pandemic.
Then my husband died two years ago.
After that I started again.
Someone forces me to come.
Yasmin is very good.
She always force and message me,
come and join, why you are alone at home.
Why you are becoming...
Why you are thinking you are alone.
Why don't you start again here?
So after she pursued me and I started again.
Yes, I enjoy.
All my other old friends are here.
Used to be that those days.
And the other new one.
We are all friends here.
Know each other's background mostly.
And go outside.
Day trips from here.
Enjoy it.
It made since I came here my depression came out slowly.
Otherwise I was very depressed.
After my husband passed away.
And now yes I am.
We are all...
Talk from any nation or any background.
We are all friends here.
We speak to each other.
Talk.
It's good.
It's very good.
You just answered all those questions really.
If someone from your family was to see this video in 10 years, 20 years, 30 years.
50 years from today.
What message would you like to give them?
Let's say 100 years from today.
Because this is where it's going on.
It's going on in people's collection.
And that's what the exhibition is about.
We maintain stories.
We tell people that we are here.
Doing things.
They arrive from we don't know where.
Ethnetic.
Age and lives group is for ethnic minority groups.
As a piece of legacy that you would like to pass on a message.
A nice message.
What type of message?
Maybe your great great great grandchildren.
What would you say to them?
I can't see.
What type of message I give them.
I can see my stay in here.
I am fortunate.
Very fortunate.
It was very good.
With every place.
My house, my husband, my house, my other things.
I went to the school and learned some teaching.
And did few years.
And then after that.
If you educate good.
And good to everyone.
You will success.
You will achieve everything.
Speak everyone nicely and be friend.
So no one will be your enemy.
This is my experience.
If someone talk to me badly.
I don't talk badly.
I speak nicely.
And next time if he don't want to speak.
I start speaking.
So this is my message for my generation.
So those people think.
And say now to me.
You are very good.
We are sorry.
We were not good at that time.
And we were angry.
And we know you are very good.
They say so I am proud.
Of my this behaviour.
With everyone.
A July is for members over 50.
If there is somebody over 50 in Newport.
That doesn't know a July.
What message would you give them?
I can say to join it.
It's very good.
All members are very friendly.
And we go out.
Go out for anything.
Shopping trips.
Parts.
Day out.
And museums.
And parties.
Go outside.
In any restaurant.
All together.
It's very fun here.
We enjoy everything.
Is there anything else you would like to say?